dgen docker and packer support (#54)
NREL/dgen: docker/README.md

# dGen Docker Usage Guide

By default, the dgen container uses the [Deleware residential dataset](https://oedi-data-lake.s3.amazonaws.com/dgen/de_final_db/dgen_db.sql).

> You can customize the dataset, see the [Customizing the Dataset](#customizing-the-dataset) section below.

Author: I went with "Customizing the Model", I think that sounds good to me.

### Mac and Linux quick start

This quickstart uses docker-compose to run dgen. The default path to store dgen data files and excel configurations is ~/dgen_data/.  This path is shared with your running containers, you can change this path but you will need to edit the `docker-compose.yml` to reflect the data directory of your choice.

Prerequisites assume you are using a Mac and you already installed [Docker Desktop](https://docs.docker.com/desktop/setup/install/mac-install/)

##### Create the data directory
```bash
$ mkdir -p ~/dgen_data/
$ chmod 755 ~/dgen_data/
$ ls -l ~/dgen_data/ # Its expected to be empty, after starting dgen you will see data files in this location.
```

##### Startup the dgen containers
``` bash
$ cd dgen/docker/
$ docker-compose up --build -d
[+] Running 2/2
 ✔ Container dgen_1     Started 0.1s
 ✔ Container postgis_1  Started 0.0s
```

##### Connect to the running containers
``` bash

> $ docker attach dgen_1 # Attach to dgen environment container

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ docker attach dgen_1 # Attach to dGen environment container
```
Would it be better to remove the word "environment" from the comment to avoid any confusion with the Conda environment? Fine with whichever you think is better!

Author: I would agree, I can see where it would be confusing.  I am going to call it the dGen container.

$ docker attach $(sudo docker ps --filter "name=dgen" --format "{{.ID}}") # If dgen_1 is not found
(dg3n) dgen@cc6e2e5f70b5:/opt/dgen_os/python$ python dgen_model.py # Run scenario
(dg3n) dgen@cc6e2e5f70b5:/opt/dgen_os/python$ exit # to exit
$ docker-compose up -d # If you exit, you have to re-up the container if you want to re-attach
```

### Troubleshooting common issues

#### psycopg2.OperationalError: connection to server

Wait 5-10 minutes for the postgres database to finish starting.

#### General errors and issues

> Try clearing your `~/dgen_data` and starting over. Make sure to provide time for the datasets to fully download on the re-attempt.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Try removing any datasets from your `~/dgen_data` and starting over. Make sure to provide time for the datasets to fully download on the re-attempt.
```

```bash
$ docker-compose down
$ rm -f ~/dgen_data/*
$ docker system prune -a
$ docker volume prune -f
```

### Disabling auto-start for the dgen virtual environment

> By default, logging into the `dgen` container automatically activates the `dgen` virtual environment.  For ease of use, its recommended to leave this the default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, logging into the `dgen` container automatically activates the `dg3n` Conda environment.  For ease of use, its recommended to leave this the default.
```
Additionally, would switching "logging into" to "starting" make more sense here?

To disable this behavior, edit the `docker-compose.yml` file in this directory and set the following environment variable:

```yaml
services:
  dgen:
    environment:
      DGEN_DISABLE_AUTO_START: 1
```

### Customizing the dataset

By default, the dgen container uses the [Deleware residential dataset](https://oedi-data-lake.s3.amazonaws.com/dgen/de_final_db/dgen_db.sql).

> You can find more datasets using the links below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can find additional agent files and their matching SQL database files for the contiguous United states using the links below:
```

> - [DGen Dataset Submissions on OpenEI](https://data.openei.org/submissions/1931)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [dGen Agent Files and SQL Databases on OpenEI](https://data.openei.org/submissions/1931)
```

> - [DGen Dataset S3 Viewer](https://data.openei.org/s3_viewer?bucket=oedi-data-lake&prefix=dgen%2F)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [dGen Dataset S3 Viewer](https://data.openei.org/s3_viewer?bucket=oedi-data-lake&prefix=dgen%2F)
```

You can customize the dataset used by overriding the DGEN_DATAFILE_URL and DGEN_AGENTFILE_URL variables in `docker-compose.yml` and then editing `~/dgen_data/input_sheet_final.xlsm` using Excel.

> Below will walk through the process of using the [Colorado residential dataset](https://oedi-data-lake.s3.amazonaws.com/dgen/co_final_db/dgen_db.sql).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below will walk through the process of updating the `docker-compose.yml` file to use the [Colorado residential agent file and SQL database file](https://data.openei.org/s3_viewer?bucket=oedi-data-lake&prefix=dgen%2Fco_final_db%2F).
```
Switched the hyperlink to just the landing page of the CO files so the added instructions below will make more sense to the users

> Update the `docker-compose.yml` to use the co_final_db sql download and set the variable to force remove the database.  This will result in dataloss from previous runs, if this is a concern, please make backups before proceeding with the below steps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, copy the link addresses from the download links of the desired agent file and the relevant SQL database file. Then, update `docker-compose.yml` to download and use the files of choice for the model runs by inserting the copied agent file link next to `DGEN_DATAFILE_URL:` and the copied SQL database file link next to `DGEN_AGENTFILE_URL:`. If this is not the first time you are setting up the Docker Container, set the `DGEN_FORCE_DELETE_DATABASE` variable to `1` to force remove any previously created database. This will result in dataloss from previous runs; if this is a concern, please make backups before proceeding with the following steps.
```

```yaml
services:
  postgis:
    environment:
      DGEN_DATAFILE_URL: https://oedi-data-lake.s3.amazonaws.com/dgen/co_final_db/dgen_db.sql
      DGEN_AGENTFILE_URL: https://oedi-data-lake.s3.amazonaws.com/dgen/co_final_db/agent_df_base_res_co_revised.pkl
      DGEN_FORCE_DELETE_DATABASE: 1 # Clear all the data in the database to reload the Colorado dataset, Warning this will remove your existing data.
```

Edit the excel document `~/dgen_data/input_sheet_final.xlsm` using Excel (Enable macros), edit the Region to Analyize to `Colorado` and Markets to `Only Residential`, then click Save Scenario.

> Restart your containers with the above options.  This will remove all your existing data and download the new Colorado dataset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, restart your containers using the above options.  This will remove all your existing data and setup your Docker Container to use the Colorado files instead.
```

```bash
$ docker-compose down
[+] Running 3/3
 ✔ Container dgen_1  Removed  9.2s
 ✔ Container postgis_1  Removed  0.1s

 $ docker-compose up -d
 [+] Running 2/2
 ✔ Container dgen_1     Started 0.1s
 ✔ Container postgis_1  Started 0.2s
 ```

> After you load the new Colorado dataset, remove the DGEN_FORCE_DELETE_DATABASE option to prevent future accidental data loss.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After you load the new Colorado dataset, reset the `DGEN_FORCE_DELETE_DATABASE` option to "0" to prevent future accidental data loss.
```

```yaml
services:
  postgis:
    environment:
      DGEN_FORCE_DELETE_DATABASE: 0
```

> You can now attach to the dgen container and monitor the data download.  This may take 5-10 minutes depending on your internet speed, if the file size is increasing its still downloading.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can now attach to the dGen container and monitor the data download.  This may take 5-10 minutes depending on your internet speed. If the file size is increasing, the data is still downloading.
```

```bash
$ docker attach dgen_1
(dg3n) dgen@cc6e2e5f70b5:/opt/dgen_os/python$ ls -lh /data/dgen_db.sql
-rw-r--r-- 1 dgen dgen 705M Jan 29  2025 /data/dgen_db.sql
(dg3n) dgen@cc6e2e5f70b5:/opt/dgen_os/python$ python dgen_model.py # Run scenario
(dg3n) dgen@cc6e2e5f70b5:/opt/dgen_os/python$ exit # to exit
```

### Stop running containers
```bash

> $ docker ps -a

Reviewer: For this block, would it be better/possible to separate the commands from the returned statements?

Author: I seperated out the code blocks for commands vs output, I do agree that it reads better with the separation. Let me know what you think.

# dGen Docker Usage Guide

By default, the dGen container uses the [Delaware residential agent file and SQL database](https://oedi-data-lake.s3.amazonaws.com/dgen/de_final_db/dgen_db.sql).

See the [Customizing the Model](#customizing-the-model) section below to learn how to use a different agent and SQL database and update the model scenario.

### Mac, Windows, and Linux quick start

This quickstart uses docker-compose to run dGen. The default path to store dGen data files, excel configurations, and results is ~/dgen_data/. This path is shared with your running containers. You can change this path but you will need to edit the `docker-compose.yml` file to reflect the data directory of your choice.

Prerequisites assume you are using a Mac or Windows computer, and that you have already installed [Docker Desktop](https://docs.docker.com/desktop/setup/install/mac-install/)

##### Create the ```dgen_data``` directory in your root directory
```bash
$ mkdir -p ~/dgen_data/ 

> $ chmod 755 ~/dgen_data/ # If using a Windows operating system, you might get an error when running this command. This command will work if you use GitBash or a similar terminal, which includes common Unix commands such as chmod.

Reviewer 2: Hi @michaelavs - for some reason, when I do `wsl --instal` I am still getting a `chmod: changing permissions of 'dgen_data': Operation not permitted` error.
